Here's a question, not a claim: when's the last time you read something — a headline, a warning, a text from a relative — believed it, and acted on it, without once asking how anyone actually knew that?
If you can't remember, that's not a knock on you. It's how the information reaches almost all of us — pre-digested, already turned into a conclusion. This course is not really about disease. It's about what happens upstream of that moment: how a raw fact becomes a claim you'll trust, and how a claim becomes a decision you'll make.
Epidemiology, on paper, is the study of how disease and health are distributed in populations, and why. True. But underneath the rates and the study designs there's a simpler structure, and it's the one this whole course sits on: data, to knowledge, to wisdom.
Three words. By the end of today you'll be able to define all three. That's the easy part. The hard part is that almost every disaster in the history of public health happened because someone quietly skipped a step on that arc, or mistook one stage for another. So here's what I want you asking, for every story I'm about to tell you: which step got skipped?
Welcome to the Epidemiology Thread.
Let's name the arc, because everything else in this course rests on it.
Data is the raw material: a count, a measurement, a box checked on a form. On its own it means nothing — two hundred eighty-seven people died is data, and it tells you nothing about why.
Knowledge is what happens when you organize data into a claim you can actually defend: a pattern, a rate higher in one group than another, a case for what the evidence seems to show.
Wisdom is the last step, and the one public conversation skips most often — knowing what to do with knowledge, for a particular population, with real tradeoffs attached. The same knowledge can point toward different, equally defensible actions depending on who's affected.
Most of what reaches you skips a step: data treated as though it's already knowledge, knowledge treated as though it's already wisdom. It almost never is.
So here are four real stories from this field's history — two good science, two bad statistics. See if you can tell which before I get to the end of each.
In 1951, two researchers named Doll and Hill mailed a one-line questionnaire to every doctor in Britain: what do you smoke? Forty thousand wrote back, and Doll and Hill did the least glamorous thing imaginable — they waited, for decades, watching who got sick.
Heavy smokers turned out to be roughly twenty-five times more likely to die of lung cancer — a gap so large, so consistent across follow-up studies, that it became one of the strongest causal claims medicine has ever produced. Scale, time, and replication did the work; no single study had to.
Here's a true sentence: more people die inside American hospitals every year than die of gunshot wounds. Are hospitals more dangerous than guns?
Of course not, and you probably already sense why — hospitals are where the sickest people in the country already are, so naturally more deaths happen inside that building. The number was never wrong; the question underneath it, compared to what and who's actually counted, was simply never asked.
You've probably seen a version of the next one: a raw count of people who died shortly after a vaccine, offered as proof the vaccine killed them. That count is usually a passive report — anyone can file one, and nobody checks whether it's true before it's logged. The system exists to catch faint warnings, not to prove causation.
Vaccinate two hundred million people and some of them will have a heart attack that week regardless — that's the background rate of being two hundred million humans. The question was never whether something happened afterward. It was whether it happened more than we'd expect.
This last one should worry you more than the other two, because nobody in it did anything wrong. In 2001, a drug called activated protein C looked like a breakthrough for sepsis — one of the biggest killers in any ICU — and the trial was so promising it was stopped early. Regulators approved it; hospitals adopted it as standard care.
A decade later, a larger, more rigorous trial found no benefit at all, and the drug was pulled from the market worldwide in 2011. Nobody lied. Nobody fudged a number. An honest trial pointed one direction and turned out to be wrong.
So here's the question worth carrying out of all four: how do you know when you've moved from knowledge to wisdom too soon?
Notice none of those four stories required you to be a doctor — you've probably made the second or third mistake yourself, at a dinner table, without noticing.
This is why epidemiology exists as its own discipline rather than a chapter inside biology or statistics: it's built to work this arc under real conditions — incomplete data, competing explanations, decisions that can't wait for certainty.
As you go through medical school, you're going to be given a lot of facts to learn. That knowledge came from data — and you need to ask where that data came from, and how it can break. Learning to question what you're handed will outlast every fact you're given over the next four years.
So let's stop talking about this in the abstract.
In a minute you'll open a real dataset — not a toy example, the actual passenger manifest of the RMS Titanic. Roughly two thousand two hundred ninety-nine people, each with a class, a sex, an age, a fare, and an outcome. Some lived. Most didn't.
Filter it by class, by sex, by age, and watch what moves when you isolate one variable at a time. Then do the hardest part of the whole arc: write down what you think the data means — a real hypothesis, one you're willing to defend and willing to have taken apart.
The data is all here. What would you look for?
Go build your first hypothesis. I'll see you on the other side.